Now, welcome to this course on concurrency in the C++ language.
So far, you have learned a lot about the language basics,
about object orientation, and about memory management.
Now, the common ground in all those areas has always
been that one step in your program followed the other,
and you could rely on the execution order of the code you wrote.
This is going to change now with concurrency.
Now, before we dive into this,
let me briefly introduce myself to you so you
know who your instructor is going to be over the next weeks.
My name is [inaudible] and I'm an engineering professor in Germany.
I have spent several years of my career with companies such as Bosch and Volkswagen,
building autonomous vehicle components such as a stereo vision camera,
such as autonomous braking systems and so on.
Also, I have created the computer vision part of the sensor fusion cause for Udacity.
When there is one area in autonomous vehicles that benefits from
concurrent processing and exploiting multi-core architectures,
it is sensor fusion.
But there are countless other industries and
applications where concurrent programming is absolutely essential.
So let's take a look at the details here.
Let's take a look at what this course is about.
This course is about writing programs in C++ that use
multiple paths of execution that have the potential to run in parallel.
One such path is called a thread and using several threads is called multi-threading.
Programs using multiple threads are called concurrent.
In the following lessons, we will take a close look at
the most important features in
the C++ standards that make concurrent programming possible.
Now, let's take a look at the definition of concurrency a bit more closely.
Now, the computer system concurrency means or concurrent behavior means that
a single system is performing
multiple independent tasks in parallel rather than sequentially as before.
Such a system is called a multi-tasking system,
and they have been around for quite some time now.
A multi-tasking operating system, or short OS,
allows us to run multiple applications at
once with the ability to switch between tasks as needed.
Interestingly, multi-tasking does not require multiple processes or multiple cores,
but inviting a program execution into many small bits and pieces and
by interleaving them with a bits of pieces of other programs,
we get the illusion of parallelism,
which is maintained by the operating system.
Under the hood however, we are only witnessing an extremely fast switching of tasks.
But true concurrency where tasks are running at
the same time or the same moment in time however,
they require a parallel architecture.
This might mean having multiple processors,
or multiple cores, or maybe both multiple cores within a processor.
Such systems are capable of truly running more than one task in parallel.
This concept is called hardware concurrency.
What makes this course so important is the fact that the prevalence of
such architecture has increased exponentially over the last years.
Today, we have a large number of everyday devices
from smart phones and tablets to automotive products,
they have all processors with several cores.
An important measure which helps to gauge
how many independent tasks can be run in parallel,
that means have genuine concurrency,
this is the number of hardware threads of a system.
We also will take a look at the number of hardware threads in your systems.
It's easy to have more tasks that the hardware can run in
parallel as soon as all hardware threads are used up in a system.
When it's reach this point,
it will revert to task switching.
For many years, the mantra of
chip manufacturers was to increase performance by pushing up a G,
for example, the clock rate with each new generation of processes.
Programmers could sit back and expect their programs to run fast and
faster with the next hardware generation without doing anything.
In recent years however, this is changing.
Chip manufacturers favor multi-core designs with 2,
4, 16 or more processes on a single chip.
If a program, and that's the programmer,
that means you wants to take advantage of this increased computing power,
it must be designed with appropriate concurrency mechanisms in mind.
For you this means that you have to add concurrency to your programming toolbox if
you want to take full advantage of
the high-performance hardware that is quickly becoming the standard.
Luckily, with the introduction of the C++11 standard,
there have been some awesome additions to the language which make it
easier for programmers to create good concurrent software.
But before we take a look at the content we will cover in this course,
let me state that all the techniques, all the functions,
all the concepts we cover can be used whether your application is running on
a machine with a single core or with the many multi-core processors.
But as you may imagine,
how you make use of concurrency in your application will
most probably depend on your target system and its hardware architecture.
Now, let's take a look at the content we will cover in this course.
In lesson 1, you will learn the difference between processes and between threads.
We will take a look in depth at various ways how threads can be started,
and also, you will write
your first concurrent program running multiple threads at the same time.
At the end of lesson 1, there will be a detailed introduction in the code base
of the course project which is a concurrent traffic simulation.
Now, lesson 2, we will take a look at ways to share data between threads.
This includes the concept of promises and futures in C++.
The difference between threads and tasks as well as
several strategies to avoid data races,
which is a major source for errors in concurrent programming as you will soon see.
Now, lesson 3, you will learn how to safely share
data between threads without having data races all over the place.
This involves the concept of mutexes and locks,
which is among the most important concepts of this course.
In lesson 4, we will expand on mutexes and
locks and take a close look at condition variables.
Also, we will be developing a super useful mechanisms for
safe concurrent data exchange between multiple threads using a message queue concept.
Finally, you will be using all your knowledge
to expand the concurrent traffic simulation to add
traffic lights to the intersections which carefully
guided vehicles through an intersection who are all,
of course, running in parallel each one and its own thread.
So please go ahead now and dive into this course on concurrent programming in C++.
Have fun, and see you soon in the first lesson.